
Research Interests

1. Early warning indicators for tipping points

A tipping point is a threshold at which a system transitions to a contrasting stable state.
They exist across many natural and artificial systems. In general, models are 
not able to accurately predict where these tipping points are located, due to 
inevitable uncertainties in model parameters. However, there exist generic 
statistical properties that systems exhibit as they approach tipping points that 
are a consequence of the dynamical phenomena known as 'critical slowing down'. 
Detecting these 'early warning indicators' in time-series data could allow for 
timely intervention to prevent or at least prepare for the regime shift. We are 
working on early warning signals that warn of specific bifurcation types, and 
assessing their utility in high-dimensional systems.


2. Stability of complex systems

Complex systems are comprised of many components that interact with one another according
to various mechanistic processes. An ecosystem is comprised of many species that can be 
connected via competitive, cooperative and exploitative interactions. A financial system is
comprised of banks, hedge funds and regulators that interact through 
monetary transactions. Both systems are prone to catastrophic shifts as we have seen from 
the collapse of the Canadian Newfoundland cod 
fishery in 1992 and the global financial crisis of 2007-2008. I am working with results 
from random matrix theory and properties of dynamical systems on networks to determine 
interaction mechanisms and network structures that result in enhanced stability of complex 
systems. An understanding of what makes complex networks robust to disturbances is important 
for the long-term sustainability of complex systems vital 
to human well-being.


3. Infectious disease modelling

There is a long history of using compartmental models to understand the population-level 
transmission of infectious disease. I am particularly interested in the dynamics of 
vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles, that are close to elimination, but survive 
due to pockets of non-vaccinating individuals. Models that couple human behaviour 
(regarding vaccination) to disease dynamics elucidate a tipping point, that if crossed, 
results in continuous outbreaks and drastically delays eradication targets. We have found 
evidence of critical slowing down in time-series of tweets preceding the DisneyLand measles 
outbreak suggesting that this coupled socio-disease system does indeed exhibit critical 
phenomena. Further work will investigate the potential for critical slowing down metrics 
in twitter data to assess population resilience to vaccine scares.


4. Socio-climate models

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) consistently base climate change 
predictions using models that do not account for dynamic human behaviour regarding carbon 
emissions. In coupling a behavioural model, that captures the fundamental tendency for 
humans to learn socially, to a recognised simple climate model, we get substantially 
different predictions of global temperature depending on social parameter settings. These 
results suggest that future climate models should incorporate human behaviour when making 
predictions. we are investigating different model frameworks for behavioural dynamics, and 
the corresponding impact this has on climate predictions. Of particular interest is 
recognising thresholds in the socio-climate system that partition the onset versus 
suppression of runaway climate change.



5. Continuous bioprocesses

Continuous bioprocesses use complete living cells or their components 
(e.g. bacteria, enzymes) to obtain biological products used in the pharmaceutical industry. 
The reaction process can exhibit a range of complex dynamics including multi-stability and 
threshold behaviour entailing a possible transition to a wash-out state 
(zero product output). As with most complex systems, these thresholds are difficult to 
identify and so we are investigating the use and practicality of early warning indicators
(see above) in this field. It so happens that many of these reaction schemes are optimised
when they are close to tipping points and so early warning indicators could provide a 
measure of risk that complements current bioprocess techniques.









